I guess we're all right there.
Transcribers might not appreciate it quite so
much. I have to keep a minute by minute account
because the tape doesn't ring like it's supposed
to. Tell me how you developed your interest in
oceanography.
My interest in oceanography came about in a rather
incidental way, I think.
But it's a rather incidental thing.
I was in the Navy in the Second World War. And
I was also in the process of studying for my degree
in physics at that time, before the Second World
War. And I went back and completed my degree in
physics after the Second World War and kind of got
into geophysics. and the Earth's magnetic field.
And in fact, I got into some of the early shielding
problems for nuclear-powered submarines. And
just one thing and another, I kind of slipped into
the field of oceanography that way. I wanted to
work around New York, and I found this unique
opportunity to work at the Lamont-Darty
Geological Observatory outside of New York in
1960. So I'm not one of the oldest people around in
oceanography. It's only been 17 years now. I was
trained as a physicist. And I was interested in
geophysics in the sense of large-scale
phenomena. And of course, the oceans do occupy 70%
of the Earth. And you've got to know what's under
the oceans if you really want to understand the
Earth. So I kind of got into it that way, I guess. But
that's kind of an oblique way to get into the field.
Well, it may have been sort of typical in the 50s and
60s in that sense. Where did you do your
undergraduate work? I went to Louisiana State
University in Baton Rouge and got my, I almost got
my bachelor's there when I went into the Navy. And
then I came back and finished up my bachelor's and
got my master's also there. My bachelor's in 1947,
my master's in 1948. And then went to New York
University and got a degree in physics. Have you
all along been inclined towards physics? That
it's something you've developed as an
undergraduate at LSU, or just? Yeah. No, ever
since, I can trace the origin of my interest in
physics very carefully as well from my high school
days. My first course in physics, ever since then,
I was sold on physics. And in fact, I've kind of
specialized in the Earth's magnetic field and
geomagnetism. I've had that as kind of a love for a
long time, too. So these two things kind of pointed
me toward geophysics and pointed me toward the
oceans, I guess. Well, the reason I was asking is
physics becomes sort of the infield in
oceanography beginning, oh, 56, 57, 58. You see
more of your people drawn towards physics, but you
precede that. Was there anybody at NYU whom? you
should say, had particular influence on you
towards physics and oceanography? No, it wasn't.
My career has been rather checkered. At NYU, I was
studying cosmic rays and things related to cosmic
rays and got interested in the large-scale
phenomena. I suppose that's kind of a geophysics.
It's not oriented toward the marine side, but it's
geophysics as well. And from there, I... You know,
when you get your degree in physics, you're really
rather well equipped to do any number of things. I
went into teaching overseas and traveling a bit
and then worked with General Dynamics
Corporation for a few years and got into this
propulsion, nuclear propulsion thing with them.
Nuclear propulsion was just becoming feasible in
those days and got into the propulsion of
submarines and from there got into marine work.
Okay. Now, when you begin to move into submarines,
where do you go to work? You don't stay with General
Dynamics? No. The thing I got into with submarines
was how you find them in the oceans, which was a very
important thing. And one of the ways you find them
is by measuring small magnetic effects. And so I
got started studying the background magnetic
effects in the ocean, whether the spatially
varying and the time varying magnetic anomalies
you have in the ocean. and found out that those, in
fact, could tell you a great deal about the Earth
and had never been studied before at all
adequately. And so when I went to Lamont, I studied
the magnetic anomalies. How long were you at
Lamont? I was at Lamont from 1960 to 1967, seven
years. And I was on the research staff there. After
that, I was two years at Hudson Laboratories,
another laboratory of Columbia University,
which has interesting history. And I came here to
Woods Hole in 1969. OK, this period between
roughly 1667, while you're involved at Lamont,
what exactly were you doing there? Lamont didn't
have in those days, and doesn't really now, didn't
have a well-defined departmental structure. But
they had small groups of people that worked
together. And I suppose my position was in charge
of the marine magnetic work. And that occupied
about half my time. And we would put magnetometers
on ships at sea and send them around the world, and
aircraft and other vessels. The other half my time
was on studying the time variations of the Earth's
magnetic field. And we put instruments in many
parts the United States and South America as well,
studying time variations. Time variation is
primarily an ionospheric phenomenon. It's
caused by a change in the ionosphere. So I had the
best of two possible worlds, the early days of
satellites and new thrust into space, and the very
interesting days in oceanography. And we were
getting marine geophysical phenomena that had
some very important meanings. But is it not
correct? Now, I can be corrected, but weren't you
one of the first people to begin to correlate this
idea of space and ocean?
We were one of the first, yes. There were several,
two or three places at those days that were into
this business. We had more data than other people.
We had data from more different parts of the world,
and so our strong point was... we could correlate
them in many different parts of the world. And it
turned out that was a very significant thing in
those days. The theory of seafloor spreading is
primarily based upon magnetic anomalies in the
ocean, as you may know. And so we had a lot of the data
to prove the theory of seafloor spreading. When
did you first become interested in seafloor
spreading? Well, I don't know. I don't know the
exact calendar date, but I know the time in the
development of science when it happened. It was
about 1965, and it was when we first got some data
from the Rike Janus Ridge south of Iceland, the
middle of the Atlantic south of Iceland, data that
was difficult to interpret in any way except in
terms of the sea floor spreading theory.
Then we got, quite by chance, we were also getting
data on the diametrically opposite side of the
Earth in the South Pacific. And it told the same
story. So when we had these data quite far apart
that could be interpreted in exactly the same way,
as a matter of fact, the magnetic anomalies in one
place were just like they were in the other, except
they were stretched out by a factor of about four.
We interpreted it exactly the same way. We were
convinced, and I think people in many other parts
of the world were convinced that there was a lot to
the seafloor spreading business. And that was
about 1965. Well, what seemed to be the general
reaction of the scientific community when this
data begins to come out on seafloor spreading in
65, 66?
Well, a disbelief, I think, not that they They
disbelieve the data, but to have such a simple and
revolutionary interpretation of it, and I say
revolutionary even though it had been suggested
before, but still, it's hard to believe that the
Earth is behaving in this way. So you've got radio
skepticism, as you still do today in many places,
and this is very understandable because it's such
a, If you're in the field and realize what it was
like before, where you're trying to explain
things in quite a different way, and then you come
along with a simplified, all-encompassing
theory like this, it really is quite profound.
It's very basic. It means a lot to the people who
were in it. And they were all profoundly impressed
with it all. And it means a lot to the science, the
way you do your science. Who else was involved in
seafloor spreading besides yourself? Well,
there were quite a few people involved in
different aspects of it.
Just on the magnetic side of it, for example, there
were three institutions that had a great deal of
more data than anybody else and were probably more
active. There was the Lamont Group, of which I was a
part, There was a Scripps group at Scripps that
Victor Wauquiez, Raff, Mason were involved in.
There was a group at Cambridge University in
Britain that Drummond Matthews and Fred Vine and
Teddy Bullard and others were involved in. Those
were rather the three centers of most of the marine
magnetic activity. Lamont didn't talk to these
other two as much as they talked to themselves. But
eventually, we all talked to each other and got it
all straightened out. But Lamont probably had
more data than either of these other two
institutions. So it was very nice that we could
interpret it in a useful fashion. But there were
other aspects to sea floor spreading than
magnetics. There were many people involved.
Modern founders of the theory generally thought I
was being Hess and Dietz. Hess isn't alive today,
but Bob Dietz certainly is. But those are the
people who promoted the idea probably more. But
the magnetics is the first data that proved it
convincingly, I think, and kind of turned
everybody's thinking around. And it was
especially important after this magnetic data
was was interpreted to get into the seismic data,
where you can make some sense out of all the
earthquake zones around the world. So that fell
into place next. So not all of the data that was
available in those days supported the theory of
sea floor spreading, and still doesn't today. But
far and away, the majority of it does. So we had to go
back and look at some data rather carefully. But
after all, when you're trying to explain almost
everything geological world with one simple
theory, you're bound to find something that
doesn't quite mesh. But those were quite exciting
days. And it's always been my feeling that our age
of discovery is not over yet.
Dirty hand. What do you mean our age of discovery is
not over yet? I mean that we're only now learning
how to
collect really global data and have the
computational facilities to see how different
types of data are interrelated. The
motions of the Earth's Axis and other things, the
earthquakes and whatnot and whatnot, probably,
and changes in the weather, probably all have some
interrelation. And we don't understand it yet.
But once we do, it'll have a tremendous
ramification about being able to control our
lives on Earth a lot better and predict what's
going to happen and where. And these kinds of
things... are very likely to come about in your
lifetime and mine. Do you think the computer is the
key to this? I think the computer played an
extremely important element in the theory of sea
floor spreading, because we could handle
oceanfuls of data at one time. Computers are going
to make a difference in the future as well.
I'm not saying that's going to be We're not going to
have a technological discovery. It's not going to
be an age of technology so much. There's still lots
of room for big thinkers. But that is a tool that you
need these days in the computer. It can do so much
that you couldn't do before. It's quite a
revolution all its own. So we'll see all kinds of
things, I'm sure, after we probably de-emphasize
the space program a little more and get into
emphasizing our own earth science programs a bit
more. I think some of these things will shake out of
the woodwork. Well, it's a thing I was not sure of.
Was it your work with sea floor spreading that led
to drilling in the ocean floor? Was this where your
interest came from in that? No.
Well, because the institutions I've been
associated with have always been a member of the
majority's organization, which advises the
deep-sea drilling project. I've always been
closely associated with the deep-sea drilling
project. And the last few years, they've had the
capability of drilling rather deep holes into the
ocean crust, which is something kind of new, and
we've been expecting quite important things to
come from that, and some of them have. And the
latest thing I've gotten involved in is
instrumenting the seafloor, putting special
instruments in the seafloor in some of these holes
that have been drilled. And so we're now getting
heavily involved in that with seismometers and
other instruments that are useful all over the
world in the seafloor, telling you something
about what's going on down there. But in a sense,
the deep-sea drilling project is another one of
these global projects that provides worldwide
data and some very good data. One has to be very
cautious of interpreting analysis
of certain of these rocks, where the rock is a very
small thing. And what happens in a particular spot
you drill in the ocean may not be happening
everywhere in the world. So you don't want to
generalize too quickly. But we're building up
quite a body of data in the deep sea drilling
project now. quite useful. When did you begin the
deep sea drilling project? Well, I think it
actually began in its disguised form back about
1958.
But they weren't using this same ship, the Glomar
Challenger. So they've completed now about 55
cruises. And they have a 55th cruise now of two
months each. So that turns out to be quite a few
years. nine years, I guess, that they've been
drilling around the world. I've been fortunate to
be able to participate in two of these cruises. And
it's been very nice because it's been a truly
international project. I think one of the first
ones we've had in the marine area that's truly
international. And working with scientists on
their own terms is not where they are an incidental
member of a project, but where we are a truly joint
work as a It's been quite a stimulating thing to do.
After all, I think the real aim of the game is
intellectual stimulation from all of the science
that we do, and satisfaction from the benefits you
get out of it to help society, I suppose. How has
international cooperation operated on this
project? Has it been good? Yes, it has. It's had its
growing pains. The project The Deep Sea Drilling
Project has been advised by this JOIDES
organization. And the JOIDES is an organization
of institutions. Well, in non-US places, the
institutions turn out to be government
laboratories frequently. So we have a mixture of
US private, semi-private labs. and some non-US
government laboratories. So it's been kind of a
hodgepodge of types of organizations. But each
one has to justify projects in a slightly
different way. Each one has slightly different
goals funded on a different basis. And it's been a
real interesting thing from the scientific
management point of view to see how you can manage
all of these different groups. And each one gets
his own fair share out of it, puts his own fair share
into it. So that's been, I think, quite good.
There's been a very minimum of political
involvement, although those things frequently
are around the corner. But it's worked out quite
well, I think. I hope we have more like it. You think
the new international boundaries will limit Yes,
very much so. The deep sea drilling project is
getting into trouble now. Several countries
couldn't see fit to let them drill in their waters
for one reason or another. And there looks like
there might be some other problems in the future in
that regard. So the problems are increasingly
frequent now. So we may have to change our way of
operating somewhat to overcome this. It's true in
oceanography in general, of course. In this
institution alone, we've had a large fraction of
our plans have been changed because we didn't get
permission from certain countries to work in
their waters offshore.
I think the DC Drilling Project has been one
project that's been very good. I've been
fortunate to be involved in some other projects
fairly large, and I think also made some
contribution too. One of those. Well, we had a
project that started here in 1972 called Project
Famous out in the joint US and French cooperative
project where we were diving with submersibles
into the mid-Atlantic Ridge Rift Valley. And we
made another 50 submersible dives to something
like 9,000 feet then. one summer alone, we've had
something like 25 or 30 cruises to the area. And we
were mapping the geological structure on a scale
of a few tens of feet. And that worked out real well.
There was a lot of popularity in the press when it
came out in 1974. Our big diving program was in
1974. And we've had some very good scientific
spinoffs from that. And some other programs have
fallen. similar diving programs in other areas.
This year, we had a big program in the Galapagos
area, the Pacific. It's been very popular.
And found some hot springs and so forth. Been very,
very good. So that type of program, that's going to
continue for a few years now, sometimes working
with the French, sometimes working just with the
US. I think that's the first real step by man man as a
scientist studying the seafloor, working on the
seafloor. And it was a real success, I think. We're
going to see more of it. We're just learning how to
utilize man on the seafloor now. That's going to be
a big thing in the next few years, manned
exploration of the seafloor. Hopefully, we could
get the space agents to become as interested in
that as they have in the exploration of the
planets.
I heard some adverse comment on subversible work.
Several people have said they don't think that in
terms of cost, you get your money's worth. What's
your reaction to that? Well, this was a very common
reaction when this project got started. And so we
tried to be extremely careful in setting up the
project so that it would be cost effective. And I
must say, the comments of that nature have almost
disappeared now. There are a few around.
When you look back in hindsight, there are a number
of things in science that really have produced
nothing. But they had to be done. You had to go
through that period. The submersible work was in
that category, I think, for a while. I don't think
it is now. We have so many different tools we bring
to bear before you even have the submersibles go
down. The people in the submersible almost know
what to expect. The details, they don't know. We
always say that they should be prepared for small
surprises, but not big ones. If they have a big
surprise, they haven't done their homework
right. So we come in and map these areas and know the
gross characteristics of them before they go in,
for safety reasons and for nothing else. So when
they go down the submersible, they have a very
specific chore that has been, in that particular
dive mission, has been screened by a group They
know it's a worthwhile mission. Project Famous
costs the US taxpayers about $4 million over a
period of four years. And there are a few people who
feel that that was ill-spent. Most people, I
think, now feel it. We've had over 100 scientific
papers come out. We've had two movies. We've had
books of science fiction and books of fact come out
on it. I think, rather well received. Very
fundamental facts emerged from this that
couldn't have been found any other way. Such as?
Oh, the details of the, of course, this is where the
plates are generated, the big plates. And we now
know a great deal more about the emplacement of
those plates than we knew before. Even though we'd
been over the area quite thoroughly with surface
ships, we just didn't have it all put together. But
we know pretty much now about the spatial and time
episodic activity that occurs there, and how the
boundaries migrate with time, and how the
volcanism migrates with time, both in the ridge
axis and in the fracture zone. And I don't think we
could have gotten that any other way. Well, you
think submersibles then were necessary to prove
plate tectonics? Yes. Well, to get these details,
you couldn't have done it any other way. I'm not
suggesting you rush out and give everybody a
submersible. There's just a few jobs that
submersibles can do, and that is one. I think there
are a couple of other jobs a submersible can do,
exploring canyons and things of the right size.
And there will be more and more jobs for
submersibles. But right now, without
submersible technology, there are a few jobs they
can do that are cost-effective. At least in my
book, they are cost-effective. I think in most
people's books, they're cost-effective. So a lot
of things cost more than submersibles these days.
It appears, I have a couple of questions too I want
to ask very quickly that I was going to ask you later
on. I'll put on tape now. It appears, though,
however, that funding for oceanography is going
to drop. It doesn't look like it's going to
increase.
And it also looks as if, because of international
treaties, oceanography is going to have to move
closer to shore than away from shore.
Well, take it one at a time, OK? I
have been in, as I mentioned before, I've only been
in the oceanography game now seriously about 17
years. And many other people have greater
perspective, I suppose. And you look for
long-term trends, and you try to see what the
meaning of those are, what causes them. And there
have been a few indicators, I think, that mark
changes in the approach to oceanography. A very
important thing has been the Navy's change in its
attitude toward marine research. And here a few
years ago, five to eight years ago, the Navy did
change its attitude quite a bit. It essentially
moved the research into its own laboratories
instead of sponsoring so much outside because it
felt like that would be more applied to their
needs. But it did affect marine research. You
know, the US Navy's research in their late 50s and
early 60s is one of the things that helped us prove
the theory of sea flow spreading. Particularly
their magnetic work, all that was supported by the
Navy in this country. The Navy did many things like
that. Now they're kind of pulling out in many ways
as far as purely academic research goes. And the
National Science Foundation and other agencies
are not picking up the ball quite as fast as the
Navy's dropping it. Because they're all looking
for applied things. They're not emphasizing as
much basic science as they did in those days. So
there's some of that. I don't think one ought to
panic at these kinds of things. I think the
pendulum will swing back. I think there's just
natural fluctuations. The American public has to
try the applied side, then they'll try the basic
side, and they'll just swing back and forth a bit.
I don't think we ever ought to go overboard in the
research business. After all, research is a rare
luxury for those of us who engage in it. You can't
expect to supply research funds for half the
United States. You really can't. So I think it
should be for a few people. And
you shouldn't expect too quick a turnaround on it.
And for that reason, people shouldn't expect a lot
of money to be poured into it. I mean, you just have
to not ask for too much. But it is a bit unfortunate
that the Navy didn't support research as much as it
did, I think.